PRIDE AND PREJUDICE by Jane Austen
CHAPTER XVI As no objection was made to the young people's
engagement with their aunt, and all Mr. Collins' scruples of leaving Mr. and Mrs. Bennet for
a single evening during his visit were most steadily resisted, the coach conveyed him
and his five cousins at a suitable hour to Maryton, and the girls had the pleasure of
hearing as they entered the drawing-room that Mr. Wickham had accepted their uncle's invitation
and was then in the house. When this information was given, and they had all taken their seats,
Mr. Collins was at leisure to look around him and admire, and he was so much struck
with the size and furniture of the apartment that he declared he might almost have supposed
himself in the small summer breakfast parlor at Rosings, a comparison that did not at first
much gratification, but when Mrs. Phillips understood from him what Rosings was, and
who was its proprietor, when she had listened to the description of only one of Lady Catherine's
drawing-rooms, and found that the chimney-piece alone had cost eight hundred pounds, she felt
all the force of the compliment, and would hardly have resented a comparison with the
housekeeper's room. In describing to her all the grandeur of Lady Catherine and her mansion,
with occasional digressions in praise of his own humble abode and the improvements it was
receiving, he was happily employed until the gentleman joined them, and he found in Mrs.
Phillips a very attentive listener, whose opinion of his consequence increased with
what she heard, and who was resolving to retail it all among her neighbours as soon as she
could. To the girls, who could not listen to their cousin, and who had nothing to do
but wish for an instrument, and examined their own indifferent imitations of China
on the mantelpiece, the interval of waiting appeared very long. It was over at last, however.
The gentleman did approach, and when Mr. Wickham walked into the room, Elizabeth felt that
she had neither been seeing him before, nor thinking of him since, with the smallest degree
of unreasonable admiration. The officers of the shire were in general a very creditable
gentleman-like set, and the best of them were of the present party, but Mr. Wickham was
as far beyond them all in person, countenance, air, and walk, as they were superior to the
broad-faced, stuffy Uncle Phillips, breathing port wine, who followed them into the room.
Mr. Wickham was the happy man towards whom almost every female eye was turned, and Elizabeth
was the happy woman by whom he finally seated himself, and the agreeable manner in which
she immediately fell into conversation, though it was only on its being a wet night, made
her feel that the commonest, dullest, most threadbare topic might be rendered interesting
by the skill of the speaker. With such rivals for the notice of the fair as Mr. Wickham
and the officers, Mr. Collins seemed to sink into insignificance. To the young ladies he
certainly was nothing, but he had still at intervals a kind listener in Mrs. Phillips,
and was by her watchfulness most abundantly supplied with coffee and muffin. When the
card tables were placed he had the opportunity of obliging her in turn by sitting down to
rest.
"'I know little of the game at present,' said he, "'but I shall be glad to improve myself,
for in my situation in life...' Mrs. Phillips was very glad for his compliance, but could
not wait for his reason. Mr. Wickham did not play at wist, and with ready delight was he
received at the other table between Elizabeth and Lydia. At first there seemed danger of
engrossing him entirely, for she was a most determined talker. But being likewise extremely
fond of lottery tickets, she soon grew too much interested in the game, too eager in
making bets and exclaiming after prizes to have attention for anyone in particular. Allowing
for the common demands of the game, Mr. Wickham was therefore at leisure to talk to Elizabeth,
and she was very willing to hear him, though what she chiefly wished to hear she could
not hope to be told, the history of his acquaintance with Mr. Darcy. She dared not even mention
that gentleman. Her curiosity, however, was unexpectedly relieved. Mr. Wickham began the
subject himself. He inquired how far Netherfield was from Maryton, and, after receiving her
answer, asked in a hesitating manner how long Mr. Darcy had been staying there.
About a month, said Elizabeth, and then, unwilling to let the subject drop, added,
he is a man of very large property in Darbyshire, I understand.
Yes, replied Mr. Wickham, his estate there is a noble one, a clear ten thousand per annum.
You could not have met with a person more capable of giving you certain information
on that head than myself, for I have been connected with his family in a particular
manner from my infancy. Elizabeth could not but look surprised. You may well be surprised,
Miss Bennet, at such an assertion, after seeing, as you probably might, the very cold manner
of our meeting yesterday. Are you much acquainted with Mr. Darcy?
As much as I ever wished to be, cried Elizabeth very warmly, I have spent four days in the
same house with him, and I think him very disagreeable.
I have no right to give my opinion, said Wickham, as to his being agreeable or otherwise. I
am not qualified to form one. I have known him too long and too well to be a fair judge.
It is impossible for me to be impartial. But I believe your opinion of him would in general
astonish, and perhaps you would not express it quite so strongly anywhere else. Here you
are in your own family. Upon my word, I say no more here than I might say in any house
in the neighborhood, except Netherfield. He is not at all liked in Hertfordshire. Everybody
is disgusted with his pride. You will not find him more favorably spoken of by anyone.
I cannot pretend to be sorry, said Wickham, after short interruption, that he, or that
any man, should not be estimated beyond their deserts. But with him, I believe it does not
often happen. The world is blinded by his fortune and consequence, or frightened by
his high and imposing manners, and sees him only as he chooses to be seen. I should take
him even on my slight acquaintance to be an ill-tempered man. Wickham only shook his head.
I wonder, said he at the next opportunity of speaking, whether he is likely to be in
this country much longer. I do not at all know, but I heard nothing of his going away
when I was at Netherfield. I hope your plans in favor of the Shire will not be affected
by his being in the neighborhood. Oh, no, it is not for me to be driven away by Mr.
Darcy. If he wishes to avoid seeing me, he must go. We are not on friendly terms, and
it always gives me pain to meet him. But I have no reason for avoiding him, but what
I might proclaim before all the world, a sense of very great ill-usage, and most painful
at his being what he is. His father, Miss Bennet, the late Mr. Darcy, was one of the
best men that ever breathed, and the truest friend I ever had, and I can never be in company
with this Mr. Darcy without being grieved to the soul by a thousand tender recollections.
His behavior to myself has been scandalous, but I verily believe I could forgive him anything
and everything rather than his disappointing the hopes and disgracing the memory of his
father. Elizabeth found the interest of the subject increase and listened with all her
heart, but the delicacy of it prevented further inquiry. Mr. Wickham began to speak on more
general topics, maryton, the neighborhood, the society, appearing highly pleased with
all that he had yet seen, and speaking of the latter with gentle but very intelligible
gallantry. It was the prospect of constant society and good society, he added, which
was my chief inducement to enter the Shire. I knew it to be a most respectable, agreeable
corps, and my friend Denny tempted me further by his account of their present quarters,
and the very great attentions and excellent acquaintances maryton had procured them. Society,
I own, is necessary to me. I have been a disappointed man, and my spirits will not bear solitude.
I must have employment and society. A military life is not what I was intended for, but circumstances
have now made it eligible. The church ought to have been my profession. I was brought
up for the church, and I should at this time have been in possession of a most valuable
living, had it pleased the gentleman we were speaking of just now. Indeed! Yes, the late
Mr. Darcy bequeathed me the next presentation of the best living in his gift. He was my
godfather, and excessively attached to me. I cannot do justice to his kindness. He meant
to provide for me amply, and thought he had done it, but when the living fell, it was
given elsewhere. Good heavens! cried Elizabeth, but how could that be? How could his will
be disregarded? Why did you not seek legal redress? There was just such an informality
in the terms of the bequest as to give me no hope from law. A man of honor could not
have doubted the intention, but Mr. Darcy chose to doubt it, or to treat it as a merely
unconditional recommendation, and to assert that I had forfeited all claim to it by extravagance,
imprudence, in short, anything or nothing. Certain it is that the living became vacant
two years ago, exactly as I was of an age to hold it, and that it was given to another
man, and no less certain is it that I cannot accuse myself of having really done anything
to deserve to lose it. I have a warm, unguarded temper, and I may have spoken my opinion of
him and to him too freely. I can recall nothing worse, but the fact is that we are very different
sort of men, and that he hates me. This is quite shocking. He deserves to be publicly
disgraced. Some time or other he will be, but it shall not be by me. Till I can forget his
father, I can never defy or expose him. Elizabeth honored him for such feelings, and thought
him handsomer than ever as he expressed them.
But what, she said after a pause, could have been his motive? What could have induced him
to behave so cruelly? A thorough, determined dislike of me, a dislike which I cannot put
a tribute in some measure to jealousy. Had the late Mr. Darcy liked me less, his son
might have borne with me better. But his father's uncommon attachment to me irritated
him, I believe, very early in life. He had not a temper to bear the sort of competition
in which we stood, the sort of preference which was often given me. I had not thought
Mr. Darcy so bad as this, though I have never liked him. I had not thought so very ill of
him. I had supposed him to be despising his fellow creatures in general, but did not suspect
him of descending to such malicious revenge, such injustice, such inhumanity as this.
After a few minutes' reflection, however, she continued, I do remember his boasting
one day at Netherfield of the implacability of his resentments, of his having an unforgiving
temper. His disposition must be dreadful. I will not trust myself on this subject, replied
Elizabeth was again deep in thought, and after a time exclaimed, to treat in such a manner
the God-son, the friend, the favorite of his father. She could have added, a young man
too like you whose very countenance may vouch for your being amiable. But she contented
herself with, and one too who had probably been his companion from childhood, connected
together, as I think you said, in the closest manner. We were born in the same parish, within
the same park, the greatest part of our youth was passed together, inmates of the same house,
sharing the same amusements, objects of the same parental care. My father began life in
the profession which your uncle, Mr. Phillips, appears to do so much credit to, but he gave
up everything to be of use to the late Mr. Darcy, and devoted all his time to the care
of the Pemberley property. He was most highly esteemed by Mr. Darcy, a most intimate confidential
friend. Mr. Darcy often acknowledged himself to be under the greatest obligations to my
father's active superintendence, and when, immediately before my father's death, Mr.
Darcy gave him a voluntary promise of providing for me, I am convinced that he felt it to
be as much a debt of gratitude to him as of his affection to myself.
"'How strange!' cried Elizabeth, "'how abominable! I wonder that the very pride of this Mr. Darcy
has not made him just to you, if from no better motive that he should not have been too proud
to be dishonest, for dishonesty I must call it.'
"'It is wonderful,' replied Wickham, "'for almost all his actions may be traced to pride,
and pride had often been his best friend. It has connected him nearer with virtue than
with any other feeling, but we are none of us consistent, and in his behavior, to me,
there were stronger impulses even than pride.'"
Can such abominable pride as his have ever done him good? Yes, it has often led him to
be liberal and generous, to give his money freely, to display hospitality, to assist
his tenants, and to relieve the poor. Family pride and filial pride, for he is very proud
of what his father was, have done this, not to appear to disgrace the family, to degenerate
from the popular qualities, or lose the influence of the Pemberley House, is a powerful motive.
He has also brotherly pride, which, with some brotherly affection, makes him a very kind
and careful guardian of his sister, and you will hear him generally cried up as the most
attentive and best of brothers.
"'What sort of girl is Miss Darcy?' he shook his head. I wish I could call her amiable.
It gives me pain to speak ill of a Darcy, but she is too much like her brother, very,
very proud. As a child she was affectionate and pleasing, and extremely fond of me, and
I have devoted hours and hours to her amusement, but she is nothing to me now. She was a handsome
girl, about fifteen or sixteen, and, I understand, highly accomplished. Since her father's death
her home has been London, where a lady lives with her, and superintends her education.'
After many pauses and many trials of other subjects, Elizabeth could not help reverting
once more to the first, and saying, "'I am astonished at his intimacy with Mr. Bingley.
How can Mr. Bingley, who seems good humor itself, and is, I really believe, truly amiable,
be in friendship with such a man? How can they suit each other? Do you know Mr. Bingley?'
"'Not at all. He is a sweet-tempered, amiable, charming man. He cannot know what Mr. Darcy
is.'
"'Probably not, but Mr. Darcy can please where he chooses. He does not want abilities. He
can be a conversable companion, if he thinks it worth his while. Among those who are at
hand, he is a different man from what he is to the less prosperous. His pride never deserts
him, but with the rich he is liberal-minded, just, sincere, rational, honorable, and perhaps
agreeable, allowing something for fortune and figure.'
The Whist party soon afterwards breaking up, the players gathered round the other table,
and Mr. Collins took his station between his cousin Elizabeth and Mrs. Phillips. The usual
inquiries as to his success was made by the latter. It had not been very great. He had
lost every point, but when Mrs. Phillips began to express her concern thereupon, he assured
her with much earnest gravity that it was not of the least importance that he considered
the money as a mere trifle, and begged that she would not make herself uneasy.
"'I know very well, madam,' said he, that when persons sit down to a card table, they
must take their chances of these things, and happily I am not in such circumstances as
to make five shillings any object. There are undoubtedly many who could not say the same,
but thanks to Lady Catherine de Borg, I am removed far beyond the necessity of regarding
little matters.' Mr. Wickham's attention was caught, and after
observing Mr. Collins for a few moments, he asked Elizabeth in a low voice whether her
relation was very intimately acquainted with the family of de Borg.
"'Lady Catherine de Borg,' she replied, has very lately given him a living. I hardly know
how Mr. Collins was first introduced to her notice, but he certainly has not known her
long. You know, of course, that Lady Catherine de Borg and Lady Anne Darcy were sisters,
consequently, that she is aunt to the present Mr. Darcy.'
"'No, indeed, I did not. I knew nothing at all of Lady Catherine's connections. I never
heard of her existence till the day before yesterday. Her daughter, Miss de Borg, will
have a very large fortune, and it is believed that she and her cousin will unite the two
estates.' This information made Elizabeth smile, as she thought of poor Miss Bingley.
"'Vain indeed must be all her attentions, vain and useless her affection for his sister,
and her praise of himself, if you were already self-destined for another.'
"'Mr. Collins,' said she, speaks highly both of Lady Catherine and her daughter, but from
some particulars that he has related of her ladyship, I suspect his gratitude misleads
him, and that in spite of her being his patroness, she is an arrogant, conceited woman.'
"'I believe her to be both in a great degree,' replied Wickham. "'I have not seen her for
many years, but I very well remember that I never liked her, and that her manners were
dictatorial and insolent. She has the reputation of being remarkably sensible and clever, but
I rather believe she derives part of her abilities from her rank and fortune, part
from her authoritative manner, and the rest from the pride for her nephew, who chooses
that everyone connected with him should have an understanding of the first class.'
"'Elizabeth allowed that he had given a very rational count of it, and they continued talking
together with mutual satisfaction till supper put an end to cards, and gave the rest of
their share of Mr. Wickham's attentions. There could be no conversation in the noise of Mrs.
Philip's supper party, but his manners recommended him to everybody. Whatever he said was said
well, and whatever he did done gracefully. Elizabeth went away with her head full of
him. She could think of nothing but of Mr. Wickham, and of what he had told her all the
way home. There was not time for her even to mention his name as they went, for neither
Lydia nor Mr. Collins were once silent. Lydia talked incessantly of lottery tickets, of
the fish she had lost and the fish she had won, and Mr. Collins, in describing the civility
of Mr. and Mrs. Phillips, protesting that he did not in the least regard his losses
at Whist, enumerating all the dishes at supper, and repeatedly fearing that he crowded his
cousins, had more to say than he could well manage before the carriage stopped at Longbourn
House.
CHAPTER XVII Elizabeth related to Jane the next day what
had passed between Mr. Wickham and herself. Jane listened with astonishment and concern.
She knew not how to believe that Mr. Darcy could be so unworthy of Mr. Bingley's regard,
and yet it was not in her nature to question the veracity of a young man of such amiable
appearance as Wickham. The possibility of his having endured such unkindness was enough
to interest all her tender feelings, and nothing remained therefore to be done but to think
well of them both, to defend the conduct of each, and throw into the account of accident
whatever could not be otherwise explained. They have both, said she, been deceived, I
dare say in some way or other, of which we can form no idea. Interested people have perhaps
misrepresented each to the other. It is, in short, impossible for us to conjecture the
causes or circumstances which may have alienated them, without actual blame on either side.
Very true indeed, and now, my Jane, what have you got to say on behalf of the interested
people who have probably been concerned in the business? Do clear them too, or we shall
be obliged to think ill of somebody. Laugh as much as you choose, but you will not laugh
me out of my opinion. My dearest Lizzie, do but consider in what a disgraceful light it
places Mr. Darcy to be treating his father's favorite in such a manner, one whom his father
had promised to provide for. It is impossible. No man of common humanity, no man who had
any value for his character, could be capable of it. Can his most intimate friends be so
excessively deceived in him? Oh, no. I can much more easily believe Mr. Bingley's being
imposed on than that Mr. Wickham should invent such a history of himself as he gave me last
night, names, facts, everything mentioned without ceremony. If it be not so, let Mr.
Darcy contradict it. Besides, there was truth in his looks. It is difficult indeed, it is
distressing, one does not know what to think. I beg your pardon, one knows exactly what
to think. But Jane could think with certainty on only one point, that Mr. Bingley, if he
had been imposed on, would have much to suffer when the affair became public. The two young
ladies were summoned from the shrubbery where this conversation passed by the arrival of
the very persons of whom they had been speaking. Mr. Bingley and his sisters came to give their
personal invitation for the long-expected ball at Netherfield, which was fixed for the
following Tuesday. The two ladies were delighted to see their dear friend again, calling it
an age since they had met, and repeatedly asking what she had been doing with herself
since their separation. To the rest of the family, they paid little attention, avoiding
Mrs. Bennet as much as possible, saying not much to Elizabeth, and nothing at all to the
others. They were soon gone again, rising from their seats with an activity which took
their brother by surprise, and hurrying off as if eager to escape from Mrs. Bennet's civilities.
The prospect of the Netherfield ball was extremely agreeable to every female of the family. Mrs.
Bennet chose to consider it as given in compliment to her eldest daughter, and was particularly
flattered by receiving the invitation from Mr. Bingley himself instead of a ceremonious
card. Jane pictured to herself a happy evening in the society of her two friends and the
attentions of their brother, and Elizabeth thought with pleasure of dancing a great deal
with Mr. Wickham, and of seeing a confirmation of everything in Mr. Darcy's look and behavior.
The happiness anticipated by Catherine and Lydia depended less on any single event or
any particular person, for though they each, like Elizabeth, meant to dance half the evening
with Mr. Wickham, he was by no means the only partner who could satisfy them, and a ball
was at any rate a ball, and even Mary could assure her family that she had no disinclination
for it.
While I can have my mornings to myself, said she, it is enough. I think it is no sacrifice
to join occasionally in evening engagements. Society has claims on us all, and I profess
myself one of those who consider intervals of recreation and amusement as desirable for
everybody. Elizabeth's spirits were so high on this occasion that though she did not often
speak unnecessarily to Mr. Collins, she could not help but asking him whether he intended
to accept Mr. Bingley's invitation, and if he did, whether he would think it proper to
join in the evening's amusement, and she was rather surprised to find that he entertained
no scribble whatever on that head, and was very far from dreading a rebuke either from
the Archbishop or Lady Catherine de Bourgh by venturing to dance.
I am by no means of the opinion, I assure you, said he, that a ball of this kind, given
by a young man of character, to respectable people, can have any evil tendency, and I
am so far from objecting to dancing myself that I shall hope to be honoured with the
hands of all my fair cousins in the course of the evening. And I take this opportunity
of soliciting yours, Miss Elizabeth, for the first two dances especially, a preference
which I trust my cousin Jane will attribute to the right cause, and not to any disrespect
for her.
Elizabeth felt herself completely taken in. She had fully proposed being engaged by Mr.
Wickham for those very dances, and to have Mr. Collins instead, her liveliness had never
been worse timed. There was no help for it, however. Mr. Wickham's happiness and her own
were perforce delayed a little longer, and Mr. Collins' proposal accepted with as good
a grace as she could. She was not the better pleased with his gallantry from the idea it
suggested of something more. It now first struck her that she was selected from among
her sisters as worthy of being mistress of Huntsford Parsonage, and of assisting to form
a quadrille table at Rosings, in the absence of more eligible visitors. The idea soon reached
to conviction, as she observed his increasing civility toward herself, and heard his frequent
attempt at a compliment on her wit and vivacity. And though more astonished than gratified
herself by this effect of her charms, it was not long before her mother gave her to understand
that the probability of their marriage was extremely agreeable to her. Elizabeth, however,
did not choose to take the hint, being well aware that a serious dispute must be the
consequence of any reply. Mr. Collins might never make the offer. Until he did, it was
useless to quarrel about him. If there had not been another field ball to prepare for
and talk of, the younger Miss Bennetts would have been in a very pitiable state at this time,
for from the day of the invitation to the day of the ball there was such a succession of rain
as prevented their walking to Maryton once. No aunt, no officers, no news could be sought after.
The very shoe roses for Netherfield were got by proxy. Even Elizabeth might have found some trial
of her patience and weather, which totally suspended the improvement of her acquaintance
with Mr. Wickham, and nothing less than a dance on Tuesday could have made such a Friday, Saturday,
Sunday, and Monday, endurable to Kitty and Lydia.